Title: What's an IRC?
Date: 2014-08-04
Category: Computing
Tags: computing, irc, anthropology, networks

Ever been in conversations where the topic shifts to “IRC” and you’re left nodding in confusion, pretending you understand? Someone called you out on using “chat room” instead of “channel”?
Use of IRC is something ingrained in computing culture, and something that you're bound to come across sooner or later.
So this is your IRC 101, so that next time that nod can be an informed one.

**What is it?**

IRC is an abbreviation for Internet Relay Chat. As the name suggests, its a chat system that allows you to talk to people all over the internet in real-time. Its been around since 1988, so its almost (sort of) as old as the internet in its current form! Its mostly used to talk with like-minded people in channels (which are dedicated to a single topic), and theres a channel for almost everything.

IRC is a decentralised system, so anyone who wants can set up a server on their own computer and chat with other people. The “relay” part means that two people running their own servers can set them up and pass them to one another. This means that whenever you talk to people on a channel, you're also talking to all the people they're connected to, and all the people they're connected to; ultimately all the people on the channel you're logged on to.

**How do I get one?**

*Step 1: Get a client!*
xchat on Linux, hexchat on Windows and limechat on Mac have all been recommended to me at various points, but play around until you find something that works for you. If youre not wanting to commit to a whole program just yet, [http://webchat.freenode.net/](http://webchat.freenode.net/) is all IRC with no installation.

*Step 2: Get a server!*
If you decided to go with webchat, then this bit’s been covered for you. If not, read on:
Freenode is a popular server, 

*Step 3: Pick a nickname!*
In the absence of real names, people on the internet know you by your nickname (and your words, but only one of these stays the same over time). Pick something that is unique (hint: Paul is a bad nickname) and something that you like! If you want to be the sole owner of a nickname, you have to register it (though that’s a little beyond the scope of this 101).

**How do I talk to people?**

*Public*
Chatting publically on channels is the heart and soul of IRC. To chat on a public channel, you first have to join it (using /join #channelname). Once youre there, then you can either lurk and watch people chat, or get in on the action. There are IRC channels for almost everything, so have a look for something that strikes your fancy. 

One awesome feature of this is the ability to “do things”. By typing “/me does something”, everyone else sees “MyNickname does something”; an enduring favourite seems to be “/me shrugs”. 

When you’re done (or bored), /leave will do what it says on the tin, and you’ll leave the channel you’re in.

*Private*
If you’re feeling the secret agent vibe, or want to share an inside joke then private chat is also an option. To use this one, you have to preface your messages with “/msg Friend’sNickname”. If you plan on carrying out a whole private conversation, “/query Friend’sNickname” is a one-off command which will start a convo. “/query” again ends it. Much less frustrating that typing “/msg Friend’sNickname” before every line.

When it gets down to it, though, IRC is more about the community and the groups that you choose to join than it is about private messaging. You have a million other ways to go about that one!

**Help, you’re making no sense!**

Oh man, I’m sorry. If you're keen to get into IRC, but I’m speaking greek, then there are a million and one different tutorials on the internet which will (hopefully) be able to help. The [wikipedia IRC tutorial](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:IRC/Tutorial) is pretty awesome, as is the [IRCHelp tutorial](http://www.irchelp.org/irchelp/irctutorial.html). If in doubt, there’s probably someone lurking in K17 who can point you in the right direction!

