Title: CTFs For Fun and Profit
Date: 2014-10-26
Category: Do The Things
Tags: CTF, computing, dothethings 

Its nearly the end of semester (yay), and the summer looms big and bright on the horizon. Scorching weather, blinding light, probably safest to stay inside. Besides, I have just the entertainment for you to make the summer seem like a blink of an eye: CTFs.

CTFs (Capture the Flags, if you want to be proper) are events that are made up of a series of little challenges, each of which gets you to poke around the insides of a computer and yank its kidney, uh, rather, a bit of information, out of it. There are a bunch of different things to be taught; hacking websites, UNIX file system tricks, buffer overflows, the list goes on. As well as being fun games, and teaching you about the many ways to break computers, you can also tell your parents that you’re learning things for uni! Really, what could be better? 

The only problem is that CTFs aren’t being run all the time (awfully remiss). Never fear though, there is an alternative in the form of wargames; wargames are CTFs without the pesky time limit or teamwork components. Neat, right!

So, in the spirit of facilitation, here are a few of my favourites:

**1. Over the Wire** ([www.overthewire.org](http://www.overthewire.org))

Over the wire was the first wargame I ever sunk my teeth into, and boy did it take me for a ride. The site has 11 (11!!!) different games, starting from easy-ish and ending in stupidly hard. Pro tip: It took me 3 months to get through the final level of Krypton, and it wasn’t until I took Codes and Cyphers at uni that I understood what I was doing in previous levels. The first level is deceptively easy. 

One of the nice things about Over the Wire is that it explains what each of the games is designed to teach you; Natas is webpage hacking, Bandit is basic (and less basic) UNIX commands etc.

The best thing about having 11 different streams, is that there’s something for everyone, and all bases are covered. If you manage to get through all of them (and remember what you did to get there, I guess), youre well on your way to becoming a l337 h4x0r. Or at the very least not failing COMP9447 if you decide to do it, your pick.

**2. Smash the Stack** ([smashthestack.org](http://smashthestack.org))

Smash the Stack is structured like Over the Wire (I’m genuinely unsure which came first, but I did Over the Wire first, so bear with me if I get it a bit backwards), and is just as fun. I’d generally recommend finishing one before starting the other, lest you get confused and lose the passwords you secretly hoarded for the one you’re doing. 

I’ve put Smash the Stack after Over the Wire because it gives you even less help (though read the FAQ page if you’re after a bit of a laugh). As a general rule, if you need help ask via IRC and hope for the best, or take a sneaky look at one of the blogs that shouldn’t be on the web, which explain how to get through the levels.

Really though, its better to do it yourself. Copying other peoples answers is much less fun, you may as well be at the beach.

If you’re a magical hacking wizard and manage to get through all of the CTFs on those two in the summer break then congratulations, that’s actually really awesome. Even if not, good on you for having a go and I hope that your summer is a fun one!

