Title: Why (CSESoc) Beta?
Date: 2015-11-29
Category: Beta
tags: beta, enrichment, computing, culture, teaching

To top off a stressful week, I’ve finally put in my application to be head of Beta in 2016 (eep!). It’s been a plan in the works for several months now, and I can only hope that it pans out the way I want it to (with me being in charge, and periodically running around like a headless chicken near deadlines).

Beta, in its current form, is the CSESoc newsletter, released biweekly in both a paper and electronic form. Its entirely student run and student made, which has the recipe to be either fantastic or a disaster depending on who’s pulling the strings (and poking people). In my time at CSE, there have been some pretty decent, and some not so good years (one of which nearly spelled the death of Beta as a whole). 

**So what do I think Beta should be?**

In its current iteration, Beta is pretty generic; some articles, puzzles and a news page. There are some benefits to this (contributors have unbridled scope in which to write what they want to see), but also major drawbacks (unbridled creativity can be daunting, lack of regular features means people don't know what to expect). In my time as Beta head, I want to change that.

How, you ask? I believe that computer science has such scope, that broad, yet recurring features will never get old. Ask 10 people their favourite command line trick, and you’ll get 10 different answers. Ask people their favorite/most hated element of CS culture and you’ll get a myriad of results. Ask someone to give you a tricky code snippet and they’ll happily inundate you. Doesn’t that sound easier than writing an article on some unspecified topic? It’s certainly more interesting to a casual reader. I plan to include all this, and more, in Beta in order to make it both an educational tool, and a mechanism whereby people new to CS can get their bearings and learn about CS in a non-classroom environment.

**Commandline Cow[Boy|Girl]**

Ever wanted to know the tricks that people use to make their lives easier on the commandline (or ever watched as a friend solved a problem you’d been struggling with using a pipe and grep)? This kind of knowledge is difficult to teach in a course, and the kind of thing often passed laterally, from one friend to another. Unfortunately, in first year most of your friends will have as little idea as you how to optimise their commandline experience! Enter Beta, and weekly tricks to try. Much easier than manually doing whatever it is you’re trying to do. 

**Code Snippets**

In the main courses offered at my university, we mostly cover C (so much C), Perl and Java. Unless you pick a specialised course as an elective, or learn a language in your spare time, there’s not much else on offer for people who want to become programming polyglots. On top of this, it can be difficult to expose yourself to many languages without both time and direction, which puts off a lot of people.

Via code snippets, I aim to introduce people to a variety of programming languages (one each week) which are not generally taught at my uni, both in the sense of describing the language, as well as showing example code and asking the reader to identify what’s actually happening in the code they’re reading. On top of exposing them to different languages, it also has the ability to increase their code-reading comprehension (a skill that is difficult to teach well in an academic setting).

Due to the wealth of programming languages out there, too, it’s possible to provide new languages for perusal almost indefinitely! Im sure that new language design can keep up to our demand (as long as we don't have to resort to Brainfuck).

**Cultural Comments**

In some ways, I consider this one of the most important sections I want in Beta. When I first entered CS, I discovered that there was a rich, complex culture built up around computer science as a whole, and everyone either assumed that I was already aware of it, or an idiot (let me tell you, neither of these things were pleasant). Through writing about these cultural elements of CS (the cult of tshirts, for example, or IRC as a meeting place), I intend for people who are not part of the dominant culture to at least understand what’s happening around them, rather than being on the out. 

I still recall the horrified look I was given when I turned down a tshirt at a work function at the end of my first year. Talk about an unintentional social faux pas! If I can save just one person from that fate, I’d consider the whole year's worth of cultural comments to be worth it.

**Open Source Articles/works**

Strange as it sounds, CSE does not exist in a vacuum. Rather, we exist in a rich world of computer scientists and friends writing, drawing and generally expounding on a range of different elements of the CS experience. Joy of joys, these works are sometimes open source, and can be used (as long as we point to its origins). 

There are several benefits to including open source works in Beta;
1) Several of them are cultural touchstones (I’m looking at you XKCD)
2) They can explain things in humorous ways, from perspectives that may not occur in CSE
3) Printing one of many encourages readers to search for more of that writer’s work, thus introducing them to blogs/comics etc that they may not have otherwise come across.
(Added bonus, it helps Beta with our chronic article shortage)

From any perspective, it’s a good move.

**Focus on present research**

One thing that I think Beta has a perfect opportunity to do, but hasn’t seemed to grab, is shine a spotlight on what research is being done in CSE at the moment. We have so many members of our faculty working on cool things, but because that’s rarely publicised nobody seems to know about it! From security research, to bioinformatics, to microkernel design, there’s an enormous wealth of things to get people interested in; if they decide to then pursue further research in the area that’s an added bonus! (I don't know how most people in CSE pick their theses at the moment, but most of my friends seemed very uninformed going into theirs, not knowing what was on offer. This is definitely something that can be remedied.)

**In summation**

As a whole, I think that Beta has a lot that it can give to the students in CSE (and even the ones who have left it!). Presently, its amorphous structure gives it a lot of variability, but in a student run newsletter that isn’t always a good thing! I’m hoping that a more structured style, including a wide variety of relevant subjects, will make readers more inclined to read each week’s edition, as well as making it easier for people to contribute (and I can promise you that submitting a commandline trick is easier than writing an article!).

For me, Beta has been a pretty integral part of the CSE experience, and I’m hoping that I can make that the case for everyone.

