Title: Bioinformatics in Australia
Date: 2015-10-13
Category: Computing
Tags: computing, bioinformatics, anthropology, presentation

Last weekend I discovered that there were almost 100 bioinformaticians in Australia (give or take)! That’s so many more than I thought, but also less than I had hoped, which filled me with a strange combination of elation and sadness throughout the weekend. It was interesting to note, too, how much of the research presented seemed to centre around cancer research and protein interaction networks; I can’t tell whether that’s an indication that string matching in bioinformatics is a solved problem, or if there’s just more money for protein-based work in Australia.

I also got to present a poster, which was a first for me (my poster is [here](static/abacbs.jpg)!). I had a chance to talk to some PhDs from Germany, as well as a researcher from Canberra who had posters themselves, but nobody really seemed interested in a poster that was primarily code, rather than experiment, based. I guess that makes sense, given that most of the researchers seemed to be from a bio, not comp, background, but it was still somewhat saddening.

On the other hand (speaking of computing, rather than bio, backgrounds), LCA2016 is having a bioinformatics miniconf, which I’m hoping to speak at, so next order of business is to start planning for that… It will be very interesting to see who attends.
 
Maybe there are more bioinformaticians hiding somewhere in the woodwork that I haven't seen yet? It seems like such a small number for such a large country. (Elsewise, maybe we are an endangered species?)

