Title: Why Hackathons Make Me Uncomfortable
Tags:
Date: 15-02-2016

Today we had the pitching event for our "Interns vs the World" hackathon event, aimed at helping to get refugees into tech. The premise of the event was to develop ideas to answer the question "How do we increase refugee participation within the tech industry?", and despite starting small it expanded to include a grad team, and teams from several different tech companies around Sydney. I was involved as an organiser for this event, and had been battling with a sense of discomfort surrounding the process for some time (which didn't help much with the organisational process). It was only today, however, that the cause of this discomfort was revealed to me.

The morning began bright and early with a group meeting and discussion to finalise the points of our talk. I was selected as speaker, which did nothing to assuage the nerves I was feeling. Despite this, I took several deep breaths (and a large coffee), and began to draft our pitch which involved a combination of community engagement and training. The first two presentations were nerve wracking, as I was presenting third. I wrote off the feeling in my chest as nerves and tried to focus. It was only after I'd presented that I noticed that this feeling was growing, rather than fading as I'd expect. The more people presented, the more uncomfortable I became, and the more I realised that the root of this discomfort was one thing; we were a bunch of (relatively) wealthy, mostly white, people talking about Syrian refugees.

*So why does this make me uncomfortable?*

The long and the short of it is paternalism. For hundreds of years, Western society has been undertaking plans to "improve" the lives of people in the Middle East, Africa, Asia etc. From missionaries in the Congo, to American and British involvement in Iraq, the West has a long history of interfering "on the behalf" of people on the ground. Al Jazeera has [several](http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2014/06/west-intervention-iraq-201462452823447754.html) [good](http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2014/06/iraq-western-military-meddlers-20146156654388265.html) [articles](http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2015/12/middle-east-breeding-place-war-sykes-picot-isil-151214083200387.html) discussing this, as well as the sometimes substantial [negative](http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/opinion/2012/03/201232710543250236.html) [impacts](http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2015/11/debate-syria-missing-syrians-151130060932842.html) it carries with it. I, personally, am strongly of the belief that paternalism perpetuates systemic issues we have already introduced to the Middle East, as well as disenfranchising the very people we profess to be aiding (spoiler alert: I'm white, and feel pretty guilty about this whole thing).

At this point, I'd like to say that there's nothing wrong with having hackathons, and nothing wrong with attempting to help disenfranchised groups within society. In fact, in its default state, its a positive thing. The issues I had with this particular hackathon fell into two categories; a lack of input from the people on the ground, as well as incorrect (and unchallenged) assumptions about the groups we're professing to aid.

The people of the Middle East have a history of being subjugated by Western powers (think Sykes-Picot agreement, and its ilk), and the continuation of leaving them out of decisions involving them is problematic on several levels. Firstly, it means that issues that they face (which may be vastly different to those of the rest of society) go ignored and thus unaddressed. Secondly, it strips the power of self-determination from these groups, and makes it increasingly difficult for them to improve themselves in meaningful ways. [Other countries](http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2015/01/frances-arab-population-divided-invisible-wall) have seen the problem with these kinds of practices, often in highly problematic ways. In not including the refugees in the hackathon designed to aid them, we remove from them the power to affect potentially meaningful change in their communities; to both their detriment and ours. As we're repeatedly told, diversity [makes us all smarter](www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-diversity-makes-us-smarter/), and produces better outcomes.

Secondly, and the thing that really struck me today, was the incorrect assumptions that so many people had with regards to the refugee situation. Assumptions of education levels, family structure, motivations, the list goes on. Nobody (our team included) took into account that these people were fleeing a war zone, and that this has substantial cognitive and psychological effects on those involved. Nobody took into account cultural differences (specifically those to do with family arrangements and the role of women). Few took into account that most of the refugees we're accepting are poorly educated and from a disenfranchised background (or so we are told). These incorrect assumptions make developing meaningful solutions substantially harder than they could otherwise have been.

*So how can we remedy these things?*

There are several ways to improve these issues: increased involvement from the community (having a refugee attached to each group, for example), cultural education or excursions before idea generation in order to prevent ideas that are totally left of field and unapplicable, choosing issues which have less of a sociocultural barrier. In many ways, implementing these things have the ability to improve the process for both sides; the target group has a chance to induce the creation of something meaningful to them, and the teams have a chance to challenge their biases and learn more about another culture.

This being said, I think its better that this hackathon happened than it not. Even some marginal awareness of the plight faced by these people is better than none, and hopefully some tangible good can come from the ideas generated. Perhaps in the future, though, we can make a larger impact.
